Title: 2606.29644v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.29644v1

Published Time: Tue, 30 Jun 2026 01:31:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 40

Markdown Content:
1

# t-STEP : An interpretable model for Total Electron Content predictions and 

# irregularities estimations 

Stephen Tete 1*, Carl Shneider 1, Maxime Cordy 1, Claudio Cesaroni 2, Andreas Hein 1, Vasily 

Petrov 3

1 Interdisciplinary Center for Security, Reliability and Trust (SnT), University of Luxembourg, 

Luxembourg City L-1855 , Luxembourg 

2 Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, Via di Vigna Murata 605, Rome  00143 , Italy 

3 Mission Space | Space Weather , Luxembourg City L-1191 , Luxembourg 

Corresponding author: Stephen Tete 

Email:  stephen.tete@uni.lu 

Orcid ID:  https://orcid.org/0009 -0006 -1881 -7360 

Co -Author’s Orchid 

Carl Sh neider:  https://orcid.org/0000 -0002 -3689 -6959 

Maxime Cordy:  https://orcid.org/0000 -0001 -8312 -1358 

Claudio Cesaroni:  https://orcid.org/0000 -0003 -2268 -4389 

Andreas Hein:  https://orcid.org/0000 -0003 -1763 -6892 2

# Abstract 

Earth system infrastructures that utilize satellite -based informatics such as Global Positioning 

System (GPS) communications are regularly impacted by Ionospheric Total Electron Content 

(TEC) gradients. Unfortunately , modeling these TEC gradients under physical laws to guide 

mitigation strateg ies is challenging due to their dynamic and sudden occurrence likelihoods. For 

context, a multi -layer perceptron machine learning (ML) model could predict hourly TEC values 

to about 80% accuracy of a GPS receiver’s est imates under solar wind and flux constraints. 

However, it is unclear whether these models could capture and preserve these TEC gradient 

irregularities within the predicted signals due to their output resolutions. To bridge this gap, we 

introduce, for the f irst time, an ML -based model trained to predict TEC at 30s resolutions. This 

cadence allows for the derivation of TEC rate changes (ROT and ROTI) as diagnostic irregularity 

indicators. The current implementation employs GPS observations across solar cycle 24, over a 

station located at 5.49 °S, 47.49 °W. A multi -metric evaluation framework, including dynamic time 

warping, is used to assess model robustness while SHAP (Shapely Additive exPlanations) 

enhances interpretability of feature attributions. For the 3 0s predictions, a test accuracy of 91% 

(MAE=4.38 TECU) is observed over the high solar activity period (2015), demonstrating the 

model’s applicability for accurate TEC estimations. We benchmark TEC predictions against the 

International Reference Ionosphere (IRI -2020) and showed that the hourly variant of our model 

outperforms IRI by about 35% in accuracy, 57% drop in absolute errors and 54% gain in prediction 

skill. More importantly, we captured significant irregularity (ROTI) dynamics and morphologies 

with the 30s TEC model under three geomagnetic storm intensity levels in contrast to an attention 

based L ong Short -Term Memory model subjected to the same sets of experiment. This study 

demonstrates the possibility of achieving scalable TEC irregularities dete ctions with a single TEC -

based model without explicitly training redundant models for individual transients. 

Keywords : Global Positioning Systems (GPS), Total Electron Content predictions , Ionospheric 

irregularities, Machine learning, Space Weather 3

# Contributions 

1.  First development of a high -resolution ML -based TEC prediction model 

2.  First d etecti on of TEC irregularities from modeled TEC signals 

3.  Identification of key TEC variability drivers with SHAP analysis 

4.  Rep roducible informatics workflow for TEC prediction, benchmarking and irregulari ty 

estimations 4

# Introduction 

L-band radio signals transmitted from Global Positioning Systems ( GPS ) are highly susceptible to 

positioning errors. These errors usually result from sharp electron density gradients as the signals 

traverse a pool of free electrons, otherwise known as total electron content (TEC), within Earth’s 

ionosphere. Here, two common effects are experienced by the trans -ionospheric EM signals, 

namely the phase advance (where the electromagnetic (EM) carrier leads the code by Δt) and group 

delay (the phase shift derivative with respect to frequency) mostly resulting in loss -of -locks, 

communication glitches, and meter -level position ing inaccuracies. For the end -user, these 

adversaries are intolerant for reasons that transcend impact on precision -agriculture, navigation, 

timing, remote sensing, military intelligence, and the global economy. Therefore, quantifying and 

predicting TEC is an important endeavor that requires meticulous attention to guide and inform 

mitigation strategies and decision making. 

TEC is defined as the total number of electrons (e -) within a 1m 2 ionospheric cross -section 

integrated along a signal’s ray path between the satellite and the receiver, where 1 TECU = 10 16 

electrons/m 2. The quantity exhibits variabilities in diurnal, seasonal, geographic, solar cycle, and 

geomagnetic activity (Liu et al. 2009; Seemala et al. 2023), making their predictions dynamic and 

challenging. TEC is very sensitive to ionospheric transients, making it a suitable quantity for early 

detection and forecas ting of space weather and geological events such as earthquakes and tsunamis 

(Feng et al. 2023; Fuso et al. 2024). 

The local time variation of TEC has been shown to impact trans -ionospheric radio waves, 

causing amplitude and phase scintillations in both low and high latitudes  (Aarons 1993; de Oliveira 

Moraes et al. 2017; Juan et al. 2018; Sousasantos et al. 2023) . In the past, Pi et al. (1997) have 

quantified these sharp TEC gradients using the rate of TEC index (ROTI). Following this proposal, 

several ionospheric transients have been easily classified and studied (de Oliveira Moraes et al. 

2017; Cherniak et al. 2018; Carrano et al. 2019; Mrak et al. 2023; Martire et al. 2023; Ren et al. 

2024; Vital et al. 2025). A spike in the rate of TEC (ROT) or ROTI could indicate an ionospheric 

phenomenon depending on its morphology, time of occurrence, and behavior. For example, a sharp 

transient on the sc ale of a few minutes could be related to a medium -scale traveling ionospheric 

disturbance (MSTID) (Kotake et al. 2006; Sivakandan et al. 2021; Fu et al. 2025) and can facilitate 

the evidence of spread -F phenomena in the mid -latitude regions (Paul et al. 2022). Similarly, a 5

spike in ROTI in the low -latitude regions during post -sunset to post -midnight hours could be 

attributed to a plasma bubble or Spread -F in the mid -latitudes  (Oliveira et al. 2020; Imtiaz et al. 

2021; Carmo et al. 2023; Paul et al. 2024) .

In the last five to ten years, the adoption of machine learning has revolutionized the way 

ionospheric TEC is modeled. For example, Tang et al. (2022) proposed a 2 -day global TEC 

forecasting approach based on the Meta’s Prophet machine learning algorithm. Habarulema et al. 

(2007) employed three (3) GPS derived TEC locations and used a neural network (NN) to predict 

TEC over the South African Geospace, outperforming the International Reference Ionosphere 

Model (IRI). Similarly, Nigusie et al. (2024) employed three gradient boosting and stacking 

machine learning architectures to predict the hourly values of the Vertical Total Electron Content 

(vTEC) where they achieved an accuracy of about 96% on the test distribution. Adolfs et al. (2022) 

developed a storm time NN model for predicting TEC over latitude 32.5°N - 70°N and longitude 

30°W - 50°E, achieving a 35.6% improvement over the German Aerospace Agency’s Neustrelitz 

TEC model (NTCM) during storm times and 17% increase during quiet time. 

In Silva et al. (2023) , a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) regional TEC model was developed 

and validated across the Brazilian region, outperforming the NeQuick -G and Global Ionospheric 

Maps (GIM) by some 27% and 33% respectively in terms of error reduction. In the space of 

irregularities and ionospheric delay predictions, several works have applied data mining and 

machine learnin g techniques to reconstruct, as well as detect the likelihood of the occurrence of 

ionospheric irregularities given the dynamics of the geophysical space we ather and ionospheric 

features (Rezende et al. 2010; De Lima et al. 2015; Sivavaraprasad et al. 2020; Nugent et al. 2021; 

Zhao et al. 2021) . The application of machine learning for ionospheric analysis, nowcasting and 

forecasting has seen tremendous impacts especially when dealing with the enormous amount of 

data from the diverse state -of -the -art instruments. 

However, a crucial ga p remains regarding the ability of ML -based TEC models to retain 

irregularity morphologies within predicted TEC signals , without explicitly training specialized 

models on each of these transients. Both previous and current state of -the -art ML -based TEC 

prediction models have low prediction cadences, hence , beyond quantifying TEC modulations, it 

is practically impossible to estimate the state of TEC transients within them. In this work, we 

attempt for the first time to predict TEC at a 30s resolution. This cadence is synonymous with the 6

sampling rate of geodetic receivers, hence making it relevant for irregularities estimations using 

established protocols . This time, we predict the TEC and compute the rate of change of TEC 

(ROTI) as a diagnostic indicator of irregularities. This approach also adds significance to the 

predicted TEC signals beyond the art of quantifying TEC modulations under different space 

weather activities. 7

# Data and Method s

TEC , ROT and ROTI computation s

In this work, our aim is to provide TEC estimations that are statistically significant for ionospheric 

irregularities detections. To aid the process, we use a ground -based GPS receiver located in Brazil 

(5.49° 𝑆 , 47 .49° 𝑊 ). The station receives broadcast dual -frequency GPS signals at  𝑓 1 =

1575 .42 𝑀𝐻𝑧  and  𝑓 2 = 1227 .60 𝑀𝐻𝑧 , allowing for the estimation of ionospheric delay s, (𝜏 ).  

> Fig. 1 Geolocations of GPS receiver (green star) and ionosondes stations (red dots) used in this study are shown in
> the right panel, whereas a sky plot showing visible satellites in the field of the GPS receiver at their relative elevations
> on 10 January 2014 is shown in the left panel

𝜏 𝑖 (𝑓 𝑖 ) = 40 .3 

> 𝑐 𝑓 𝑖 2

∙ 𝑠𝑇𝐸𝐶  (1) 

We then compute the  sTEC  using Eq. 2.

𝑠𝑇𝐸𝐶 = 1 

> 40 .3
> 𝑓 1
> 2𝑓 2
> 2
> 𝑓 1
> 2−𝑓 2
> 2

(𝐿 1𝜆 1 − 𝐿 2𝜆 2 + 𝜑 𝑛 + 𝜏 𝑛 ) (2) 

where c is the speed of light,  𝑓  is the signal frequency and  𝑠𝑇𝐸𝐶  is TEC along the slant path of the 

signal or the slant TEC.  𝐿 1, 𝐿 2 are the carrier phase measu rements at  𝑓 1and  𝑓 2. 𝜆 1, 𝜆 2 are the signal 

wavelengths whereas  𝜑  and  𝜏  are the phase ambiguity and phase delays. 8

Assuming a thin -shell ionospheric layer at a height  (𝐻 𝑖𝑜𝑛 ) of 350 km, and a constant Earth 

radius  𝑅 𝑒 = 3671 𝑘𝑚 , the obliquity function  𝑀 (𝜃 𝑒𝑙𝑣 ) was used to convert  𝑠𝑇𝐸𝐶  to  𝑣𝑇𝐸𝐶  (Vertical 

Total Electron Content) after which we apply an elevation ( 𝜃 𝑒𝑙𝑣 ) mask of 30° to mitigate multipath, 

backscattering and tropospheric effects. 

𝑣𝑇𝐸𝐶 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠 (𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑠𝑖𝑛 ( 𝑅 𝑒 

> 𝑅 𝑒 +𝐻 𝑖𝑜𝑛

𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃 𝑒𝑙𝑣 )) ∙ 𝑠𝑇𝐸𝐶  (3) 

The rate of TEC change (ROT) was calculated using Eq. 4. We identified an ionospheric 

irregularity following the formulation of (Pi et al. 1997). 

𝑅𝑂 𝑇 𝑘 𝑗 = 𝑇𝐸𝐶 𝑘 

> 𝑗 −𝑇𝐸𝐶 𝑘 −1
> 𝑗
> 𝑡 𝑘 −𝑡 𝑘 −1

(4) 

We adopted a sliding window of 5 minutes over ROT and computed the deviations for the values 

in the sequences to obtain ROTI. Throughout the proceeding experiments, this would be the formal 

derivation of ROTI after validat ions with existing literature and databases alike. 

𝑅𝑂𝑇𝐼 = √〈𝑅𝑂𝑇 2〉 − 〈𝑅𝑂𝑇 〉2 (5) 

where  𝑗  is the visible satellite within the receiver’s field of view,  𝑘  is the satellite epoch, TEC is 

the vertical total electron content and  ⟨⟩ is the averaging operator .

Data 

Following the computation process es above, we obtain ed  vTEC  at each Ionospher ic Pierce Point 

(IPP) for all instances of  𝑗  from 2009 to 2015 (7 years) . In total, approximately  40 × 10 6 non -

corrected TE C observations were obtained . After this , we used the closest ionosonde radar chain 

to the receiver (Fig. 1 ) to t rack the critical frequency (foF2) and virtual heights (hmF2). To ensure 

we had consistency with the GPS TEC observations, we mitigate d several anomalies with the 

ionosonde datasets. First, the operational period of these ionosondes spanned 2012 to 2025 , which 

was only a subset of the GPS receiver s’ . Secondly, the sampling rate s are 10 min utes , and finally, 

there exist instances of complete signal absorp tion , making it impossible to measure the 

ionospheric properties. We will describe how these adversaries are mitigated in the modeling 

routine section below . We use the pyspedas framework Grimes et al. (2022) to obtain space weather 9

parameters including Kp, Sym H and Flow speed from the OMNI module to aid the modeling 

process. In its entirety, t he potential feature space had about 36 variables (Fig. S 1). These would 

be trimmed to reduce model complexity and feature dimensionality .

Modeling routine 

In this section, we describe the methods used to ensure temporal consistency with TEC and 

mitigate various instrument discrepancies before training. The routine begins by mitigat ing the 

major ionosonde data anomalies mentioned in the previous section . The 10 minute resolutions 

were resampl ed on the time ind ex to match the vTEC measures . This introduce d additional gaps 

on top of exist ing ones . A linear interpolat ion could solve this at the risk of losing intricate 

variability . This was not ideal. Hence , we resort ed to an eXtreme G radient Boosting (XGBoost) 

inference. At the time of data extraction, the Embrace and GIRO DIDBase databases had more 

than 13 years of ionosonde datasets running. This archive was enough to aid the development of 

XGBoost inference models for foF2 and hmF2 to cover the missing data .

Given that the sun directly control s ionization at atmospheric altitudes, the solar zenith 

angle (SZA) and solar radio flux at the 10.7 cm wavelength could be used to reconstruct foF2 and 

hmF2 . For instance, at lower zenith angles the sun is nearly overhead, which implies direct heating, 

increased ionization and increased foF2 and vi se-versa. The XGBoost sub -model uses year, day of 

year (Doy) , time, F10.7 cm , Kp , SZA and sunspot number (SSN) to reconstruct the foF2 whereas 

for hmF2 , we engineer a fractional feature (thus, ratio between SZA and F10.7 ) to aid the inference. 

This fractional feature , upon investigation , prove d to be very important for hmF2 estimation rather 

than foF2. The foF2 and hmF2 would be used as physics constrain ts in the TEC model to guide 

irregularities occurrences. The following algorithm summarizes the ionosonde data reconstruction 

solution. 10 

Algorithm : Routine for  ionosonde  ensemble  reconstructions 

Input : 𝒙 𝜖 ℝ(𝑛 ×𝑑 )

Target with gaps : 𝑦 ϵ ℝ𝑛 

Gap solution : 𝑦 ̂

Let the observed set be , 𝒪 ⊂ {1, 2, 3 … n}

Let spread -F and open gaps be , ℳ = {1, 2, 3 … 𝑛 } \ 𝒪 

Model : 𝑓 θ: ℝ𝑑  → ℝ

Mapping:  𝑦 𝑖 ≈ 𝑓 θ(𝒙 𝑖 ), ∀𝑖 ϵ 𝒪 

while  ℳ ≠ ∅:

Loss:  min  

> 𝜃

∑ (𝑦 𝑖 − 𝑓 𝜃 (𝒙 𝑖 ))2

> 𝑖 ∈𝒪

Data Fusion:  𝑦 ̂𝑖  = 𝑓 𝜃 (𝒙 𝒊 ), ∀𝑖 ∈ ℳ

Reconstruction: 

𝑦 ̃𝑖  = {𝑦 𝑖 , 𝑖  ∈ 𝒪 

𝑦 ̂𝑖 , 𝑖  ∈ ℳ

end 

Earlier in the data section, we mentioned the feature dimensionality at our disposal. We 

manage this complexity through correlation analysis, mutual information gain, and post -hoc 

evaluations and retained ensembles that proved significant for the TEC prediction task . The 

retained ensembles were also consistent with findings in the literature. Ultimately , the matrix 

contained temporal covariates (year, time and Doy ), satellite IPP information (Lat, Lon, Azimuth 

and elevation) , Ionosonde parameters (NmF2, hmF 2 and foF2) and space weather conditions (Kp, 

Sym H, and Vx ). Sym H and Kp are maintained due to their respective storm indications at local 

(equatorial) and glob al levels . We decompose d Doy and time into their Fourier transformations 

using Eq s. 6 and 7 to encode seasonality and temporal cyclicality in the TEC mode l. In the end, 

we performed an ablation study to understand the impact of marginalizing the covariate s on the 

models ability to predict TEC and capture irregularities within the predicted signal. 

𝑠𝑑𝑜𝑦 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛 (2×π×𝐷𝑜𝑦  

> 365 .25

) , 𝑐𝑑𝑜𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠 (2×π×𝐷𝑜𝑦  

> 365 .25

) (6)

𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛 (2×π×𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒  

> 24

) , 𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠 (2×π×𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒  

> 24

) (7)

Model selection and architecture s

Several algorithms have been applied to predict ionospheric TEC and irregularities. A hand full of 

such algorithms that have seen tremendous successes include s, the gradient boost ed decision trees, 11 

recurrent and neural networks. Recently, transformer architectures have also been explored. In this 

work, we have experimented with four networks namely: L ong Short -Term Memory (LSTM) ,

Light -Gradient Boosting Machine (LightGBM) , Cat egorical Boost ing and Random Forest and 

found that LSTM and LightGBM support ed our objectives in terms of TEC prediction accuracy .

LSTM is widely known , thus , going forward , we refer the reader to Yu et al. (2019) for more 

insight on the algorithm . This allows us to focus on the LightGBM as it has not been exploited in 

this area. More over , it is the main method adopted in this work due to its performance . However ,

we present a quick overview of the attention (A TT ) technique used with the LSTM method 

(LSTM+attention) . These two architectures provid e a good basis for comparing the performance 

of a deep learning and a machine learning metho d.     

> Light Gradient Boosting Machine (L ight GB M)algorithm

LGB . is a gradient boosting framework that is based on decision trees. It shines in terms of speed 

and efficiency and allows GPU acceleration. The algorithm uses an innovative Gradient -based 

One -Side Sampling (GOSS) algorithm to selectively retain gradients from large instances while 

randomly sampling those from smaller gradients. This is facilitated through leaf -wise growth and 

the selection of the leaf with highest loss reduction, helping to reduce computation cost and 

retaining accurate estimates of informa tion gain for each node split using Eq. 8.

𝐺𝑎𝑖𝑛 = 1 

> 2

( 𝑔 𝐿  

> 2
> ℎ𝐿 +𝜆

+ 𝑔 𝑅  

> 2
> ℎ𝑅 +𝜆

− 𝑔 2

> ℎ+𝜆

) (8)

where  𝑔 , ℎ are the sum of gradients and Hessians for all instances,  𝜆  is the regularization parameter 

and  𝑔 𝐿 , ℎ𝐿 , 𝑔 𝑅 , ℎ𝑅  are corresponding values for the left and right child nodes. 

For a detailed breakdown of the algorithm, we refer the reader to (Ke et al. 2017) . Under 

regression tasks, LGB tends to minimize an objective function over an ensemble of decision trees 

using Eq. 9. The loss is mostly a squared error, calculated using Eq. 10 . In each sample, Eq. 11 and 

Eq. 12 are used to obtain the gradient and Hessian, which are then aggregated to estimate the 

optimal split points to update leaf weights. A prediction for sample  𝑥  is the sum of all tree outputs 

in Eq. 14.

𝑜𝑏𝑗 = ∑ 𝑙 (𝑦 𝑖 , 𝑦 ̂𝑖 ) + ∑ Ω(𝑓 𝑡 )𝑛  

> 𝑖 =1

(9)12 

𝑙 (𝑦 𝑖 , 𝑦 ̂𝑖 ) = (𝑦 𝑖 − 𝑦 ̂𝑖 )2 (10 )

𝑔 𝑖 = 𝜕𝑙  

> 𝜕 𝑦 ̂𝑖

= −2(𝑦 𝑖 − 𝑦 ̂𝑖 ) (11 )

ℎ𝑖 = 𝜕 2𝑙  

> 𝜕 𝑦 ̂𝑖
> 2

(12)

𝑤 𝑗 = − ∑ 𝑔 𝑖 𝑖 ∈𝐼 𝑗  

> ∑ℎ𝑖 +𝜆 𝑖 ∈𝐼 𝑗

(13)

𝑦 ̂𝑖 = ∑ 𝑓 𝑡 (𝑥 𝑖 )𝑇  

> 𝑡 =1

(14)

where the regularization term,  Ω(𝑓 𝑡 ) = 𝛾𝑇 + 𝜆  

> 2

∑ 𝑤 𝑗  

> 2𝑇
> 𝑗 =1

, 𝑙 (𝑦 𝑖 , 𝑦 ̂𝑖 ) is the loss function,  𝑤 𝑗  and  𝑇  are 

the leaf weight  𝑗 , and number of leaves respectively . 𝑦 ̂𝑖  is the prediction for sample  𝑥 𝑖  and  𝑓 𝑡  is the 

output of tree  𝑡  for input  𝑥 𝑖 .

The algorithm tackles complex dimensionality by bundling mutually exclusive features and 

employs histogram -based learning to evaluate every possible split point, allowing for faster 

computation of split gains. 

Attention mechanism 

Attention mechanism s come in different forms including feature, temporal , multi -head ,

hierarchical attention and more . Amid these forms , the basic idea is to attend to strategic 

components that ensure generalizability . These solutions come in the form of assign ing weights to 

the input elements to enable them to prioritize relevant updates within the modeling sequence . This 

is done by first computing similarity scores between each key (𝐾 ) and the query (𝑄 ), then scal ing 

by dividing the scores by the key dim ension  (𝑑 𝑘 ). A softmax norma lization is applied to obtain 

attention weights , which are then applied to the values for a weighted sum. 

Attention  = {

𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑠  = 𝑄 𝐾 𝑇 

α = 𝑠𝑜𝑓𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 (𝑄 𝐾 𝑇 

> √𝑑 𝑘

)

𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝑄 , 𝐾 , 𝑉 ) = α𝑉 

(15) 

In the current study, we appl ied feature and temporal attention to the sequences created for 

the LSTM. This is done to help the LSTM focus on context s that are dynamically relevant for the 13 

current TEC prediction s. While feature attention (instantiated with batch size, sequence length, 

feature dimension) applies weights to the features (example: Sym H, V) at each timestep , the 

temporal attention produces a context vector (of batch size, lstm hidden dimension) to summarize 

the sequences with attention weights. 

Following an exhau stive hyperparameter search using the same criteria for the LGB, we adopt 

(batch si ze , seq_len, lstm_hidden_dim , learning rate, early stopping patience , epoch ) of (512, 720, 

64, 5e-4, 5 and 100) , resp ectively . Below is an implementation flow of the dynamic attention for 

the model used for the TEC prediction.  

> Splitting strategy

After pre processing and correcting the data for any potential errors as well as applying an elevation 

mask of 30 °, the final data was about  29 × 10 6. There are several ways of splitting datasets into 

training, validation and testing sets. In this work, we assume time dependence for training and 

testing and create a 6:1 year partition. Thus , 1 year (2015) was used for testing corresponding to 

about  3 × 10 6 whereas 6 years (2009 – 2014) was reserved for training and validation. To ensure 

that we validated across the solar cycle phases , we apply a 20% splitting and sampling from all 

phases and carefully inspecting for no leakage s. Eventually, training samples were about  21 × 10 6

and validation set was about  5 × 10 6. We scale the data with the robust scaler to mitigate outliers.  

> Hyperparameter tuning

Due to the data size, it is expensive to run many ensembles. For this reason, we predefine d set s of 

hyperparameters and identif ied them with run numbers . All runs were tested with subsets of the 

training, validation, and testing sets and monitored with the root mean squared error. We do not 

choose a set based on low TEC prediction errors but the one that improved irregularities retention 14 

after prediction. The main challenge was choosing the best learning rate and leaf numbers to 

optimize speed and accuracy . Finally, we settled on run 2 with 256 leaves and 0.1 learning rate. 

The run summary is shown in (Table S 1) of the supplementary material .

Model 

To put our model in context, we refer to it as “t -STEP” (Temporal Sampling and TE c Prediction). 

Temporal sampling because , we systemically -engineered the routine to refactor its predictions on 

TEC, between 30s to 1h at the user’s request . For example , to compare with the state -of -the -art 

operational models , we refactor t -STEP to predict hourly estimates (t -STEP hourly) by varying the 

constraint requirements at observation time . Henceforth, any mention of “t -STEP” refers to our 

proposed TEC model. Fig ure 2 outlines the ma in routines discussed to this end whereas Fig. 3 

describes the system ’s ar chitectu re .15      

> Fig. 2 Flow diagram highlighting the steps and routines used to construct the t -STEP model. The violet rectangle
> summarizes the model’s initial and development phases whereas the green rectangle represents the evaluation phases
> Fig. 3 Simplified architectural representation of t -STEP’s subsystems and routines .

Experiments and model evaluations 

The ionosphere responds to the dynamics of space weather variably. This means that the launch of 

ionospheric TEC irregularities is rather dynamic and does not always follow predictable patterns. 

For this reason , models that tend to predict these irregularities directly are easily overwhelmed by 

their nature, especially under different space weather conditions. As our approach is not direct, we 

gain impetus over th is dynamic nature by predicting the TEC directly, after which we later infer 

the irregularit y signatures from. Here, we set up one experiment under quiet, modera te, and severe 

geomagnetic activity conditions, respectively, and evaluate our model’s performance towards TEC 

predictions and irregularity (ROTI) morphologies. For TEC and irregularity reconst ructions, we 

benchmark our model against the LSTM and the International Reference Ionosphere (IRI -2020) 

model for TEC predictions. 16 

We evaluated the model s using the root mean squared error (RMSE), mean absolute error 

(MAE), correlation coefficient (R 2), concordance correlation coefficient (ρ𝑐𝑐𝑐 ) metrics. The metric 

(ρ𝑐𝑐𝑐 ) was introduced by Lin (1989) . The metric measures how close the data points cluster, 

otherwise known as precision , and how they agree perfectly along the  45 ° line , thus giving a true 

representation of the alignment between the predictions and actual values in terms of location and 

scale. All other metrics have regular meanings. 

𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑠 =

{

𝑟𝑚𝑠𝑒 = √1 

> 𝑁

∑ (𝑦 𝑖 − 𝑦 ̂𝑖 )2𝑁 

> 𝑖 =1

𝑚𝑎𝑒 = 1 

> 𝑁

∑ |𝑦 𝑖 − 𝑦 ̂𝑖 |𝑁 

> 𝑖 =1

𝑅 2 = 1 − ∑ (𝑦 𝑖 −𝑦 ̂ 𝑖 )𝑛   

> 𝑖 =1
> ∑(𝑦 𝑖 −𝑦 ̅)2𝑛
> 𝑖 =1

𝜌 𝑐𝑐𝑐 = 2𝜌 𝜎 𝑦 𝜎 𝑦 ̂ 

> 𝜎 𝑦
> 2+𝜎 𝑦 ̂
> 2+(𝜇 𝑦 −𝜇 𝑦 ̂)2

(1 6)

where  𝑦 𝑖  and  𝑦 ̂𝑖  are the observed and predicted vTEC data points,  𝑦 ̅ is the mean of the observed 

values . ρ and  σ are the Pearson correlation coefficient, and standard deviation whereas  μ, ρ𝑐𝑐𝑐  and 

𝑁  are the mean and concordance correlation coefficient and number of data points in a given 

population. 

Dynamic time warping (DTW) 

DTW is a significant dynamical algorithm used to perform similarity checks between two time 

evolving signals, such as time series that may differ in phase, length, pulse locations, or speed, 

which is better than instantaneous distance metrics such as the E uclidean distance. DTW is 

different in such a way that it can warp the time axis to match similar patterns, shapes, and 

magnitudes (if they occur) at different rates. 

Given two signals,  𝑥 𝑖 , 𝑥 𝑗  where , 𝑥 𝑖 ∈ 𝑥 𝑖 1, 𝑥 𝑖 2, … , 𝑥 𝑖𝑚 , 𝑥 𝑗 ∈ 𝑥 𝑗 1, 𝑥 𝑗 2, … , 𝑥 𝑗𝑛 . The pairwise 

distances are computed and the warping path, also given as the path through the cost matrix,  𝐷 ∈

ℝ(𝑛 +1)×(𝑚 +1) that minimizes the overall cumulative distances is estimated. After this, the DTW 

distance is the minimum cumulative cost required to traverse the optimal path and align the 

sequences of  𝑥 𝑖  and  𝑥 𝑗 .17 

𝐷 𝑖 ,𝑗 = 𝑑 (𝑥 𝑖 , 𝑥 𝑗 ) + 𝑚𝑖𝑛 {

𝐷 𝑖 −1,𝑗 −1

𝐷 𝑖 −1,𝑗 

𝐷 𝑖 ,𝑗 −1

(1 7)

Due to the adaptability of this algorithm, several proposals have been made to use DTW as a loss 

function to train machine learning models (Cai et al. 2019) . This algorithm also finds practical 

applications in timeseries forecasting, where forecast horizons shift the series in time, relative to 

the ground truth. 

We understand that the temporal positions of TEC transients within the machine learning 

model may be shifted either by early or later predictions. This is the case for all empirical models 

and may have an effect on the morphologies after reconstruction. In practice, evaluating such 

scenarios under regular linear metrics may not reflect full assessments of the model. Hence, we 

utilize the DTW algorithm to augment these linear evaluations. 

> Comparison of t -STEP with the International Reference Ionosphere (IRI) model

By 2014, the International Reference Ionosphere (IRI) has been accepted by the International 

Standards Organization as the standard for ionospheric parameterizations (Bilitza et al. 2014) . It 

provides critical parameters such as Temperature, electron density, TEC, foF2, hmF2, and ion drifts 

at atmospheric altitudes (50 to ~2000 km) to support operational needs. For this reason, we chose 

to measure the improvement level by validating it ag ainst t -STEP. The output cadence of the IRI 

TEC is about 1 hour ; hence , we use the hourly output of t -STEP to ensure consistency. Finally, the 

multi -metric evaluations Eqs. 16 and 18 are used to assess the experimental performance. 

𝑆𝑆 = 1 − 𝐸 𝑡 −𝑆𝑇𝐸𝑃 

> 𝐸 𝐼𝑅𝐼

(1 8)

where E is the error with respect to t -STEP and the IRI models , and SS is the skill score. 

Section s ummary 

In this section, we have shown how TEC and ROTI were computed to attain the 30s observation 

series. We have described the datasets and methods used to harmonize inconsistencies with them, 18 

including routines used to mitigate observations from the different experimental instruments. 

Feature curation and model selection criteria and s chematics have been discussed . Finally, we 

present the experiments, evaluations, and benchmarking strategy against the international 

reference ionosphere, to quantify improvement s in our model .19 

# Results and discussion s

In this work, we performed several experiments and model tuning aimed at obtaining a model that 

predicts the ionospheric TEC at a higher temporal resolution , relevant for estimating ionospheric 

irregularities or transients. We must state that we employed a single station receiver approach at 

this stage. To the best of our knowledge, the model presented in this paper is the first of its kind 

under the single station approaches that have been trained with an enormous database due to the 

method adopted. 

Seven different variants of the t -STEP model were tested, among which one was selected 

based on its ability to generalize and capture significant ionospheric transients translated in the 

ROTI under varying space weather conditions. Table 1 presents the metrics for the adopted version 

of t -STEP , whereas the other variants will be presented under the ablation study. 

Table 1 Performance quantification of t -STEP in different stages of model development 

Model  Modeling Stage  MAE 

(TECU) 

RMSE 

(TECU) 

𝛒 𝒄𝒄𝒄  𝑹 𝟐 

Training  2.46  3.34  0.98  0.96 

t-STEP (30s)  Validation  2.46  3.33  0.98  0.96 

Testing  4.38  5.75  0.95  0.91 

Test on hour ly 

cadence 

3.89  5.10  0.97  0.93 

t-STEP hourly  t-STEP  3.92  5.25  0.97  0.93 

IRI -2020  9.06  11.36  0.79  0.69 

Skill Score  0.57  0.54  N/A  N/A 

LSTM + ATT  Training  2.94  3.91  0.97  0.94 

Validat ion  4.31  5.81  0.95  0.91 

Testing  4.72  6.21  0.95  0.8 9

Table 1 shows the metrics of t -STEP and its hourly variant , benchmarked against IRI -2020 

and the LSTM deep learning model. Overall , w e observed minimal prediction errors with t-STEP 

on the 30s TEC values . For instance, across the entire test population , an absolute error of 4.38 

TECU was recorded , which averages to about 7.2% error reduction in t -STEP over the LSTM. 20 

Similarly, the hourly variant outperfor med the IRI -2020 model , gaining ~35% in R 2 accuracy ,

~57% drop in MAE and a skill score of ~54% , demonstrat ing the operational capability of t -STEP .

Relative to the training and validation accuracies , the test accuracy fairly drops . This drop is 

understandable especially when the test population is in the maximum (peak) phase of the solar 

cycle (2015) . The ionospheric conductivity becomes strong with heighte ne d flux es and increased 

frequenc y of strong TEC gradients. Nevertheless, the error ranges are adequate and low.               

> Fi g. 4Regression between observed and predicted TEC on the test population for t -STEP (a) and the hourly variant
> (b). The distribution of residual errors for the two plots (a) and (b) are colored orange and green ,respectively (c)

Figure 4 presents the regressions and residual distribution s for the t -STEP and t -STEP 

hourly model s. The general prediction ability of the model , as confirmed in Table 1 , is great ,

especially in predicting most of the absolute TEC magnitudes. We observe d that the residual 

distribution is nearly gaussian , with most of its values concentrated near zero. In Fig. 4a , w e see 

that the dynamic ray paths of the satellites give the TEC broad distributions. Further investigations 

reveal ed that t his stems from the geomagnetic strength disparities at the location of the GPS 

receiver . Ray tracks traversing regions of the geomagnetic equator experience dynamic elevated 

TEC magnitudes and strong temporal gradients compared to off magnetic equator regions due to 

the differences in electrodynamics. Without averaging th ese effects on the TEC as is done with 

hourly TEC models , t -STEP still predict ed the TEC very well ( 4a) and even better when averaged 

(4b) , asserting the model’s robustness to external factors and capturing the underlying physics 

seamlessly. 21 

Seasonal variations         

> Fig .5Seasonal plots showing t -STEP’ svariability in two seasons of Autumn (top panels) and winter (bottom
> panels) and the ir associated residual distributions (right panels)

In Fig. 5, the observed (left) and model reconstructions (middle) have been grouped into 

two seasons in the Brazilian sector. March to April ( Autumn ) in the first row and May to July 

(Autumn – winter). The model’s reconstruction of the seasonal TEC morphologies is also 

phenomenal, showing consistent variabilities. Observed patterns include d: higher TEC values in 

Autumn than in winter, weaker troughs between 4 am and 9 am, and higher crests as the sun rises .

These are consistent with the finding s of (Venkatesh et al. 2015; Dias et al. 2020). The residual 

distributions in the right panel of the figure confirm ed the strong ionization background in March 

– April that contrib ute d to the slight error increment s (MAE = 4.08 TECU ) than in winter (MAE 22 

= 3.34 TECU ). More importantly, t -STEP does not overestimate the TEC values nor significantly 

underestimate them in a way that may affect the morphology of any intrinsic transient. 

Evaluating t-STEP ’s robustness on space weather dynamics and irregularit y detections 

In this section, we investigate d t-STEP ’s ability to capture TEC irregularities using the ROTI 

parameter . Since ionospheric irregularities are dynamic under quiet and active space weather 

conditions, we select ed three different levels of geomagnetic activity ( i.e. weak -to -negligible 

storm, moderate and strong storm s) to ensure holistic evaluation s. To guide th is selection, we rely 

on the storm classification thresholds of (Gonzalez et al. 1994; Chakraborty and Morley 2020) and 

Space Weather live. We must emphasize that vTEC is the only predicted parameter . ROTI is 

computed using the formulations in Eq s. 4 and 5 as a diagnostic indicator of model robustness .

Weak -to -negligible storm conditions                     

> Fig .6Comparison between GPS TEC and t-STEP TEC (top) ,ionospheric irregularit yindicator ( ROTI) (middle)
> and geomagnetic indices ( Kp and S ym H)during aperiod of weak -to -negligible storm conditions (bottom panel)

23 

The left panels in the first row of Fig . 6 correspond to GPS observations , while those on 

the right represent t-STEP’s predictions . The second row shows the diagnostic ROTI 

reconstructions. The two storm -time indices in the bottom panel s describe quiet space weather 

conditions with SymH reaching -30 nT and a Kp of 3. In the first row, t -STEP’s output is compared 

with the GPS observations , where we observe d good TEC agreements throughout the series ,

signaling the model’s adaptability under quiet time conditions. The model’s TEC output track ed 

the overall temporal dynamics of the GPS observation s and reproduce d the diurnal TEC structure 

closely with  R2, ρ𝑐𝑐𝑐 = 0.90 , 0.95  (see residual distributions in Fig . 9a ).

Interestingly , both GPS and t -STEP TEC preserved consistent ROTI morphologies and 

timeliness (middle panels) . This observation explains the extent to which the model underst ood 

the physical conditions that favor the formation of ionospheric irregularities . The ROTI 

irregularities were mostly co nstrained at post -sunset and post -midnight hours and occurred on all 

4 days of the observation period . Since our interest is primarily on the large irregularities , we 

pass ed the two signals through a Butterworth hi gh -pass filter (HPF) to analyze the high frequency 

signals from both observations (yellow plo ts) . This g ave clear indication s of periods within our 

model’s product where improvemen ts may be needed. A typical example is seen around noon on 

January 19 , where negligible irregularities were seen on GPS , slightly contrast ing the model’s 

estimation . We must clarify that ROTI cannot be negative ; hence, both GPS and t -STEP have 

unconstrained minimums of 0 , except for the filtered signals . A detailed quantitative assessment 

of ROTI signals is provided in a later section .24            

> Moderate -to -weak Storm conditions
> Fig .7Same as Fig. 6 ,except for aperiod of moderate -to -weak storm activity, indicated by the Kp and S ym H indices
> (bottom panel)

Figure 7 takes the same form as Fig. 6 , except that the geomagnetic activity level is 

considered moderate following a weak storm that occurred before noon on 17 February. The 

second storm’s sudden commencement (SSC) hit Earth before 20:00 hours on the same day, but 

the minimum excursion was seen on the 18th. Here, the minimum and maximum values of S ym H

and Kp were about -70 nT and 5. An increase in TEC was observed later in the day with significant 

suppression of conditions that trigger ed storm time irregu larities until after the sun set. With this 

storm, it can be observed that t -STEP tends to under predict the main phase TEC modulation s,

which translated in  R2, ρ𝑐𝑐𝑐  of  0.73 , 0.84  (Fig . 9b) . This underprediction might have resulted from 

the multi -step -wise storm injection nature (see SymH in the bottom panel ), which appeared to 

complicate the general storm -time electrodynamics learn ed during training. 

Nonetheless , the TEC irregularit y law that govern s the model appeared unbroken .

Adequate large scale morphologies and variabilit ies were maintained with fewer false signals than 

during the negligible storm conditions. These observations assert confidence in t -STEP’s output ,25 

highlighting its robustness to physics and presenting a good balance between generalizability and 

accuracy. 

Strong -to -moderate storm conditions           

> Fig .8Same as Fig. 6, except for a period of strong storm activity (Patrick’s day Storm) , as indicated by the Kp and
> Sym H indices (bottom panel)

One of the famous geomagnetic storms in the first half of the third millennium has been 

the 17 March 2015 storm. This storm, also known as the “St. Patrick’s Day Storm” , made headlines 

due to its major two -step morphology and strong impact on interplanetary space and at Earth. 

Several literatures have termed it a super storm (Wu et al. 2016; Suji and Prince 2018) due to the 

level of compression -driven disturbances at Earth. The storm disturbance index (S ym H) hit below 

-200 nT and Kp recorded 8 -. The impact of Patrick’s day storm was felt on several infrastructures, 

including disrupting Railway (Thaduri 2020), Power grids (Carter et al. 2016), G PS and precise 

positioning (Paziewski et al. 2022) operations .26 

In Fig. 8, we observe d several storm effects, including an increase in ionospheric TEC after 

the first storm impact, which signi fies the injection of more electrons later into the ionosphere. 

This general trend was captured in the model , including the interesting daytime TEC bite -out 

phenomenon (except that the magnitude was small) at around 15 hours on the 17 th . Here, we 

observe d a prediction accuracy of  R2, ρ𝑐𝑐𝑐  0.88 , 0.94  (Fig. 9c). An interesting contrast between the 

predictions in Fig s. 7 and 8 is in the metric dynamics. One would expect strong accuracy drops 

under the strong space weather conditions compared to the mode rate. However, we observed 

otherwise. For instance , given the same observation duration (3 -days), the absolute error change d

by ~77 % with R 2 accuracy drop of ~17 % (metrics inferred from Fig. 9) between the strong and 

moderate storm conditions . This happen ed because the storm morphology in Fig . 7 seemed more 

complex . T here existed abo ut six (6) more excursions (see SymH) of different storm magnitudes 

within the observation window than the two (2) observed in Fig . 8. This goes to confirm that 

duration -driven storms have more severe impact s than intensity -driven storms , both on models and 

on infrastructure. 

The TEC irregularities in Fig . 8 have also been reconstructed in a way that gives the 

irregularities alerts in response to the storm -time gradients. The ionosphere over th e GPS receiver 

responds to geomagnetic storms at some δ𝑡 . The peculiar ity of the Patrick’s day storm (i.e. , two 

storms with the second h itting before the first recovers), trigger ed a different irregularit y

occurrence dynamics in both GPS and t -STEP . As the first storm struck on the 1 7th, irregularities 

were suppress ed by injection s from the second stronge st storm . The irregularities re -emerged 

during the day on the 18th , before noon. Th ese observations are consistent with the physics of 

storm time irregularities , underscoring the sensitivity of both systems to storm timing and 

sequencing. 27             

> Fig .9TEC residuals plotted as distributions for the three storm cases .Panels (a) ,(b) and (c) correspond to
> observations shown in Fig s. 6, 7 and 8 ,respectively

Assessing irregularit y reconstructions with power spe ctral density (PSD) and dynamic time 

warping (DTW) 

Although ROTI was only used to understand the retentive ability of the empirical models to 

embedded transients, it is important to understand the m as they describe d significant ionospheric 

events that are usually studied independently. During the analysis , we discovered a limitation in 

the t-STEP’s reconstructions . There are few instances in which irregularities appeared early or late 

in the TEC signals . Due to this, w e perform ed a power spectral density (PSD) analysis to assess t -

STEP’s product to understand the likely cause s (Fig. 10 ).           

> Fig .10 TEC power spectral density (PSD) plot for GPS (blue) and t -STEP (orange) under the three storm scenarios
> presented in Fig. 6 (left) , Fig. 7 (middle) , and Fig. 8 (right)

Th e PSD analysis in Fig. 10 confirmed the metrics in Fig. 9 and showed that the moderate 

stor m ( Fig. 7 ) induced the largest gradient divergence from the GPS (middle panel). The temporal 

discrepancies appear ed to result from high frequency variations. This behavior highlights the 

impact of storm -time constraints on model operation s. In all scenarios , variability and overall trend 

remained consistent with peculiar stable behavior s at low frequencies that highlight the model’s 

robustness .28 

Ablation study 

In this section, we marginalize the contributions of the features and analyze their effects on the 

model’s performance. The features were grouped and ass igned a unified label based on the 

instrument of measurement . The groups ha d the following names and definitions : IPP (Lat, Lon), 

Geom (Kp, S ym H, Flow speed), Iz (FoF2 /NmF2 , hmF2) and strategic combination s. This allow ed 

the analysis to focus on both instrument level and feature behaviors.           

> Fig .11Metric scores for six (6) variants of t -STEP constructed by dynamically marginalizing the contributions of
> individual and feature groups . The plots have been put in the context of the original t -STEP model (leftmost plot) to
> aid observational evidence

In Fig. 1 1, we see that model accurac ies drop variably with feature label s and group . These 

drops , compared to the t-STEP, may not be huge , as overall TEC trends were captured. However, 

when analyzed thoroughly in the context of our second objective, we realize d that the effects 

bec ame non -trivial . The other models either failed to entirely preserve the physical dynamics that 

generated the embedded transients . A typical example for Iz is shown in Fig. 1 2. Clearly, the model 

lacked confiden ce in describing the electrodynamics of irregularities , which led them to become 

trapped in the background noise. Subjecting them to high -pass filtering (HPF) indicated their 

presence , however, the pronouncements do not compare to t -STEP’s . Th ese observations confirm 

that ionosonde -driven parameters serve as pivotal energy constraints for the general physics of 29 

irregularit y formation. Hence, for any model seek ing to forecast irregularities occurrence s,

incorporat ing ionosonde observations is essential and highly recommended.              

> Fig .12A typical model output generated after removing the influence of Iz (the second model in Fig . 11) .This
> example use sthe same weak -to -negligible storm interval described in Fig. 6

SHAP explanations 

The S Hapley Additive exPlanation s (SHAP) is a model -agnostic method for interpreting ML 

models ’ outcome . It shows the contribution of each input ensemble to the predicted output . With 

SHAP, global and local feature contributions can be assessed to aid in spatial and temporal 

explanations. Here, w e show the global contribution of features to the quiet and Patrick’s day 

storm -time predictions in Fig. 6 and Fig. 8 . We also examine the temporal evolutions of the storm 

time TEC values using the SHAP force plots at three time snapshots in sequence .30                          

> Fig .13SHAP Summary plot sof the top 10 important features and their effects on the model under the quiet
> conditions (a) and disturbed (b) conditions (for Fig s.6 and 8TEC predictions , respectively )

The summary plot in Fig. 1 3 shows how features are updated by importance (top to bottom) 

to influence model predictions. Each dot represent s the feature values , wh ile the colors are shapely 

value s corresponding to the feature’s state that influenced the high ( yellow /red ) or low ( dark 

blue/ blue) TEC prediction. At first gla nce , we see that under quiet (a) and disturbed (b) conditions, 

the sine and cosine of time and Doy (stime , ctime , sdoy, cdoy ) and N mF2 are the controlling 

parameters in the TEC prediction. This is consistent with established theoretical derivations . While 

time and Doy embeddings contro lled diurnal and seasonal variations , NmF2 ensured that electron 

density changes were captured .

A striking ob servation which confirm ed that t -STEP is rooted i n physics and does not mak e

random predictions is the importance ranking levels of the storm time index (Sym H) under 

conditions (a) and (b) . During quiet times, the model underst ood that the disturbance coupling is 

weak , hence , it relegate d Sym H below the top most ranks. The opposite is true for storm condition s

where the Sym H impact is high er on the importance hierarchy. 31             

> Fig .14SHAP force plot for three time snapshots (a) 2015 -03 -17 03 :00: 30, (b) 2015 -03 -17 1 3:30:00, and (c) 2015 -
> 03 -17 19:00:00 during the St. Patrick’s day storm

Figure 1 4 was used to examine t-STEP’s decision in predict ing individual TEC value s. In 

this graph , t he model assumes a global value for TEC , known as “the base value ” around which 

future update s are made as the feature values bec ome fully available to describe the domain space .

Then the value moves to the actual prediction f(x) . In Fig . 1 4a, which is a time in the SSC , Sym H

turns positive ( +13 nT) . After this, seasonal components tend to influence higher TEC values .

Because the Geospace conditions at this time d id not fully radiate storm phase conditions, there 

was a large offset from the dominant diurnal , electron density , and Sym H component s to mitigate 

any high TEC prediction. This consequently resulted in the model’s output of 15.23 TECU 

prediction . Fig s. 1 4b and c are excerpts from the excursion and recovery phases of the storm. At 

this point , the model underst ood the full state in the Geospace as all features tend to radiate 

disturbed conditions (red) . Th is consequen tly increase d TEC value s even in the recovery phases ,

as a result of charge depositions into the ionosphere post geomagnetic storm occurrence s.32 

Compar ison of t-STEP with the LSTM model 

In Table 1, we s ee that the accurac y of t -STEP and LSTM was almost similar for the TEC 

prediction task . However, as we mentioned earlier, the only way to determine robustness was to 

subject the model to reconstructing ROTI morphologies within the predicted signal. We have 

clearly demonstrated with thorough qualitative and quantitative assessments that t -STEP present s

ideal predictions and reconstruction s to support our objectives. Since benchmark ing ROTI 

reconstructions against the IRI model is impossible , we developed a n LSTM deep learning model 

for th ese comparison s. The core modeling processes follow the descriptions in the methodology 

section .  

> Fig .15 ROTI reconstructions from GPS (left) versus LSTM (right) during quiet conditions. The arrows point to the
> expected temporal positions of ROTI, color -coded with GPS observations

Figure 15 is a typical ROTI reconstruction s based on LSTM for the qui et time event s

discussed earlier in this study . For all instances of the LSTM ’s irregularity reconstructions, the 

morphologies were completely distort ed . They appeared to be engulfed by noise art ifacts. To 

investigate this further , we analyzed and color -code d the predicted signals irregularities with those 

from the GPS observations. Even so , no clear patterns were visibl e. The unclear morphologies 

suggested that perhaps LSTM s might be too sensitive to fast changing signa ls but fin d practical 

applications in slow changing signals , hence, it s remarkable successes in hourly TEC predictions 33 

in the literature . We therefore conclude that, for this objective, LSTM , regardless of its attention 

units, underperforms t -STEP for irregularit y ret ention .   

> Compar ison of t-STEP and LSTM relative performance s

In T able 2, we summarize the TEC prediction metrics for t-STEP and LSTM under the three space 

weather scenarios already discussed . The only advantage LSTM demonstrated was its ability to 

predict TEC in moderate storm conditions b etter than t -STEP. We identify the competitive 

advantage with bold fonts in the proceeding tab les. 

The DTW algorithm is robust at matching and evaluating similar shapes and morphologies 

within two time varying signals. We applied the algorithm to identify embedded shape matches 

within the LSTM ROTI signals and evaluated the resulting outcomes using standard performance 

metrics. The goal was to align similar irregularity patterns that are not clearly discern ible from the 

GPS observations. The performance of p erfectly matched pattern s is summarized in Table 3 and 

in Table S2 of the supplementary material .       

> Table 2Comparison of m etrics between t -STEP and LSTM for the three space weather conditions

Model  Metrics  Quiet Condition  Moderate S torm  Strong Storm 

t-STEP  MAE 

RMSE 

R2

ρccc 

3.84 

5.03 

0.90 

0.95 

8.96 

10.94 

0.73 

0.84 

5.05 

6.97 

0.88 

0.94 

LSTM  MAE 

RMSE 

R2

ρccc 

4.05 

5.2 7

0. 89 

0.9 5

5.69 

7.31 

0.88 

0.93 

5.19 

7.12 

0.87 

0.94 34 

Table 3 Dynamic Time Warping metrics for the ROTI scenario s under t-STEP and LSTM 

Storm Scenario  MAE 

(TECUmin -1)

RMSE 

(TECUmin -1)

𝛒 𝒄𝒄𝒄  𝑹 𝟐 

t-STEP 

A (weak to no storm)  0.019  0.0 33  0.87  0.72 

B (moderate to weak storm)  0.0 25  0.0 46  0.88  0.70 

C (strong to moderate storm)  0.0 25 0. 043 0.88  0.74 

LSTM+ATT 

A (weak to no storm)  0.016  0.040  0.84  0.64 

B (moderate to weak storm)  0.017  0.035  0.87  0.73 

C (strong to moderate storm)  0.020  0.0 43  0. 84  0.67 

Observation al perspectives 

Throughout the experiment, we observed the TEC prediction and irregularity reconstruction 

stability under t-STEP . For a prediction with 30 s resolution, we initially anticipated otherwise ,

especially considering the complexity of the spatio -temporal dynamics of all 32 GPS satellites 

over the receiver . However, the results proved rewarding , giv ing us the empirical edge to advance 

efforts towards small scale events . Based on our observation, we further hypothesize that for 

chaotic prediction tasks such as this, gradient -boosting ensemble methods appear to outperform 

their deep learning counterparts. Though consistent with few literature findings including mention s

in (Carvalho et al. 2022; Tete et al. 2024) , further experiments would be needed to fully validate 

this hypothesis to help advance prediction tasks of this nature within Earth system sciences .35 

# Conclusion s

In this work, we introduced a system engineered temporal Sampling and TEC Prediction (t -STEP) 

model that predicts the ionospheric TEC at 30s , a cadence relevant for TEC irregularities 

estimations. These irregularities have been captured in the rate of TEC index (ROTI) in this study. 

To aid in the development of t -STEP, we have used TEC observations from a GPS receiver station 

in the Brazilian sector and across solar cycle 24 (2009 to 2014). Here, we have used t -STEP to 

demonstrate significant TEC predictions across the high solar activity year of 2015 and assessed 

these predictions with metrics including R2 and concordance correlation s, where 0.91 and 0.95 

overall accuracies were achieved . We have demonstrated and evaluated the health of the model’s 

TEC output for irregularit y detection s and found good reproducibility of large scale gradient 

irregularities consequential of three main space weather conditions . We evaluated the hourly 

version of t -STEP in the context of the IRI -2020 output s. In this experiment, IRI could produce 

the hourly TEC at about 69 % while t -STEP does the same at 9 3% accuracy , corresponding to about 

35 % increase in performance and 54% prediction skill . In terms of ROTI reconstructions, we 

observed that the model’s reconstruction s matched the GPS observations well , revealing adequate 

occurrenc e periodicities . Significant ROTI morphologies were preserved in the two TEC signals 

(GPS and modeled TEC) signifying the possibility of using a single model to detect ionospheric 

transients . On the contrary, these irregularities could not be captured clearly in the LSTM model 

implemented on the same datasets and under the same space weather conditions . The TEC 

climatology in the LSTM wa s captured but the gradients were overshadowed with noise artefacts .

This suggests that LSTM s might not be adequate for chaotic prediction tasks. It should be noted 

that the current implementation was limited to a single station. As the current observations looks 

promising , we are exploring plausible ways to constrain the model s to predict TEC to scale to aid 

the tracking of small scale TEC transients before extendin g to multiple stations. Another future 

direction would be to compare against transformer architectures and assess the ir irregularity 

preservation s across nowcast and forecast scenarios .36 

# Data Availability 

The G PS data used to arrive at the conclusion of this work can be assess ed from the Brazilian 

netwo rk, Rede Brasileira de Moni -toramento Contínuo dos sistemas GNSS (RBMC) at: 

“https://geoftp.ibge.gov.br/informacoes_sobre_posicionamento_geodesico/rbmc/ ” The ionosonde 

data was obtained from the EMBRACE network “ https://www2.inpe.br/climaespacial/portal/the -

embrace -program/ " and the DIDBase GIRO web portal “ https://giro.uml.edu/ionoweb/ ” via 

python interfacing. Solar and geomagnetic activity indices have been accessed using the OMNI 

module of the Pyspedas framework “https://pyspedas.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ ”. Access to 

geomagnetic storm information (“https://www.spaceweatherlive.com/en/auroral -activity/top -50 -

geomagnetic -storms ”) was done from Space weather live .

# Statements and Declarations 

Competing Interests : The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 

Funding : There was no funding supporting this work. 37 

# References 

Aarons J (1993) The longitudinal morphology of equatorial F -layer irregularities relevant to their 

occurrence. Space Sci Rev 63:209 –243. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00750769 

Adolfs M, Hoque MM, Shprits YY (2022) Storm -Time Relative Total Electron Content 

Modelling Using Machine Learning Techniques. Remote Sens 14:1 –17. 

https://doi.org/10.3390/rs14236155 

Bilitza D, Altadill D, Zhang Y, et al (2014) The International Reference Ionosphere 2012 – a

model of international collaboration. J Sp Weather Sp Clim 4:A07. 

https://doi.org/10.1051/swsc/2014004 

Cai X, Xu T, Yi J, et al (2019) DTWNet: A dynamic time warping network. Adv Neural Inf 

Process Syst 32:1 –11 

Carmo CS, Dai L, Denardini CM, et al (2023) Equatorial plasma bubbles features over the 

Brazilian sector according to the solar cycle and geomagnetic activity level. Front Astron Sp 

Sci 10:1 –14. https://doi.org/10.3389/fspas.2023.1252511 

Carvalho O, da Silvade Almeida Nava Alves PAA de LCCR, AOB F (2022) Nowcasting of 

amplitude ionospheric scintillation based on machine learning techniques. IEEE Trans 

Aerosp Electron Syst 58:4917 –4927. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1109/TAES.2022.318 8741 

Chakraborty S, Morley SK (2020) Probabilistic prediction of geomagnetic storms and the Kp 

index. J Sp Weather Sp Clim 10:. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1051/swsc/2020037 

De Lima GRT, Stephany S, De Paula ER, et al (2015) Prediction of the level of ionospheric 

scintillation at equatorial latitudes in Brazil using a neural network. Sp Weather 13:446 –

457. https://doi.org/10.1002/2015SW001182 

de Oliveira Moraes A, Costa E, Abdu MA, et al (2017) The variability of low -latitude 

ionospheric amplitude and phase scintillation detected by a triple -frequency GPS receiver. 

Radio Sci 52:439 –460. https://doi.org/10.1002/2016RS006165 

Gonzalez WD, Joselyn JA, Kamide Y, et al (1994) What is a geomagnetic storm? J Geophys Res 38 

Sp Phys 99:5771 –5792. https://doi.org/10.1029/93JA02867 

Grimes EW, Harter B, Hatzigeorgiu N, et al (2022) The Space Physics Environment Data 

Analysis System in Python. Front Astron Sp Sci 9:. 

https://doi.org/10.3389/fspas.2022.1020815 

Habarulema BJ, Mckinnell L, Cilliers PJ (2007) Prediction of global positioning system total 

electron content using Neural Networks over South Africa. J Atmos Solar -Terrestrial Phys 

69:1842 –1850. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jastp.2007.09.002 

Imtiaz N, Hammou Ali O, Rizvi H (2021) Impact of the intense geomagnetic storm of August 

2018 on the equatorial and low latitude ionosphere. Astrophys Space Sci 366:106. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10509 -021 -04009 -2

Juan JM, Sanz J, González -Casado G, et al (2018) Feasibility of precise navigation in high and 

low latitude regions under scintillation conditions. J Sp Weather Sp Clim 8:A21. 

https://doi.org/10.1051/swsc/2018011 

Ke G, Meng Q, Finley T, et al (2017) Lightgbm: A highly efficient gradient boosting decision 

tree. In: Advances in neural information processing systems. p 30 

Lin LI (1989) A concordance correlation coefficient to evaluate reproducibility. Biometrics 

45:255 –268 

Nigusie A, Tebabal A, Galas R (2024) Modeling Ionospheric TEC Using Gradient Boosting 

Based and Stacking Machine Learning Techniques. Sp Weather 22:. 

https://doi.org/10.1029/2023SW003821 

Nugent LD, Elvidge S, Angling MJ (2021) Comparison of Low -Latitude Ionospheric 

Scintillation Forecasting Techniques Using a Physics -Based Model. Sp Weather 19:1 –16. 

https://doi.org/10.1029/2020SW002462 

Oliveira CBA de, Espejo TMS, Moraes A, et al (2020) Analysis of Plasma Bubble Signatures in 

Total Electron Content Maps of the Low -Latitude Ionosphere: A Simplified Methodology. 

Surv Geophys 41:897 –931. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10712 -020 -09584 -7

Paul KS, Rafi MH, Haralambous H, Mostafa MG (2024) Correlation of Rate of TEC Index and 39 

Spread F over European Ionosondes. Atmosphere (Basel) 15:. 

https://doi.org/10.3390/atmos15030331 

Pi X, Mannucci AJ, Lindqwister UJ, Ho CM (1997) Monitoring of global ionospheric 

irregularities using the Worldwide GPS Network. Geophys Res Lett 24:2283 –2286. 

https://doi.org/10.1029/97GL02273 

Rezende LFC, De Paula ER, Stephany S, et al (2010) Survey and prediction of the ionospheric 

scintillation using data mining techniques. Sp Weather 8:1 –10. 

https://doi.org/10.1029/2009SW000532 

Silva A, Moraes A, Sousasantos J, et al (2023) Using Deep Learning to Map Ionospheric Total 

Electron Content over Brazil. Remote Sens 15:412. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs15020412 

Sivavaraprasad G, Venkata Ratnam D, Sridhar M, Sivakrishna K (2020) Modelling and 

forecasting of ionospheric TEC irregularities over a low latitude GNSS station. Astrophys 

Space Sci 365:168. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10509 -020 -03883 -6

Sousasantos J, Gomez Socola J, Rodrigues FS, et al (2023) Severe L -band scintillation over low -

to -mid latitudes caused by an extreme equatorial plasma bubble: joint observations from 

ground -based monitors and GOLD. Earth, Planets Sp 75:. https://doi.org/10 .1186/s40623 -

023 -01797 -5

Suji KJ, Prince PR (2018) Global and local Joule heating during substorms in St . Patrick ’ s Day 

2015 geomagnetic storm. Earth, Planets Sp. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40623 -018 -0940 -3

Tang J, Li Y, Yang D, Ding M (2022) An Approach for Predicting Global Ionospheric TEC 

Using Machine Learning. Remote Sens 14:. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs14071585 

Tete S, Otsuka Y, Zahra WK, Mahrous A (2024) Leveraging machine learning techniques and 

GPS measurements for precise TEC rate predictions. GPS Solut 28:1 –16. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10291 -024 -01652 -4

Wu CC, Liou K, Lepping RP, et al (2016) The first super geomagnetic storm of solar cycle 24 : “ 

The St . Patrick ’ s day event. Earth, Planets Sp. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40623 -016 -0525 -y

Yu Y, Si X, Hu C, Zhang J (2019) A Review of Recurrent Neural Networks: LSTM Cells and 40 

Network Architectures. Neural Comput 31:1235 –1270. 

https://doi.org/10.1162/neco_a_01199 

Zhao X, Li G, Xie H, et al (2021) The Prediction of Day -to -Day Occurrence of Low Latitude 

Ionospheric Strong Scintillation Using Gradient Boosting Algorithm. Sp Weather 19:1 –14. 

https://doi.org/10.1029/2021SW002884